

# Draft

You might have seen the videos lately of guys sitting in front of a TV, waiting for a politician to say the words "Good morning" at the beginning of the press conference and either cheering or putting their head in their hands, depending on the outcome. Said dude is likely betting from either Kalshi or Polymarket, the most popular prediction market apps of today. These apps let you bet on a particular event, which comes in the form of a yes or no question. For example, you can bet "yes" or "no" for whether the Rotten Tomatoes critic score of *Avatar: Fire and Ash* will be above 70 the day it comes out. There is a price associated with each voting option that corresponds to the likelihood of that option being true at the current moment; the price of the "yes" and "no" votes will add up to $1. So a "yes" vote priced at 20 cents means the market currently believes there to be a 20% change of the RT score being above 70 by the specified date and an 80% chance of it being below 70. Each bet, or "market", has a cutoff date when the result is determined and the winning bettors are paid out. When the date arrives, those who chose correctly are paid out 1 dollar for each vote they purchased. Those who were not correct lose all of the money they bet. This means that if I bought 1 "yes" vote at 20 cents and I am correct, I will make 80 cents profit, but if I am not correct, I lose 20 cents. This is simplifying it a bit, but that's the gist.

Turns out out prediction markets are not a new concept. Political betting dates back to 1503 to predict papal and royal successions  ([source](https://users.wfu.edu/strumpks/papers/Int_Election_Betting_Formatted_FINAL_NoComments.pdf))!. In the 1980s, they were used at the University of Iowa to forecast US presidential election outcomes with [surprising accuracy](https://web.archive.org/web/20121104063806/http://tippie.uiowa.edu/iem/media/08pres.html). Out of all polls, the prediction market was the closest estimate of each candidates share of the popular vote. Why are they so accurate? One answer is that prediction markets force bettors to be more thoughtful about their answer because wrong bets mean financial loss. When many individuals make choices using on their best judgement, a collective wisdom emerges. Meanwhile, any noise such as uninformed bets or biases are filtered out, making the outcome more accurate than any single expert. Another reason prediction markets can be so accurate has to do with the information itself. Informed bettors will likely bet more money on an outcome than uninformed bettors. Due to the immense speed that information travels today, the message will soon trickle out to wider and wider groups, causing more informed bets and tipping the price/odds in the right direction.

Tech CEOs of companies like Kalshi are harping on the accuracy of prediction markets to convince the public that their apps are the news outlets of the future. I think there is some truth to that, especially because crowdsourced information is by definition less biased than information obtained from any single news outlet. Moreover, my main concern with prediction markets is that people can very easily exploit them for financial gain by directly changing future outcomes. For example, we've recently observed politicians saying irrelevant words in quick succession at the end of a speech or even abruptly ending their speech early, yielding large gains for long-shot bettors. You might be thinking, "Alright that's weird, but what harm does it do?". Prediction markets incentivize bad actors to "change the future" if they have the power to influence what's being bet on. It might start with changing the length of a speech, but as this type of political betting becomes more accepted, important policy decisions could be made not because they are the right decisions, but because they were deemed unlikely in the prediction market and therefore will yield a huge gain.

Believe it or not, Kalshi is considered a CFTC regulated exchange, meaning  There is really no oversight into this either, as it seems to be allowed by the CFTC, the organization that supposedly regulates Kalshi, even though it states in it's Core principles that contracts must not be readily susceptible to manipulation [ref](https://www.cftc.gov/IndustryOversight/ContractsProducts/EconomicRequirements/index.htm). To be fair, they have [prohibited congressional decision contracts](https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/8780-23#:~:text=Washington%2C%20D.C.%20%E2%80%94%20The%20Commodity,contracts%20self%2Dcertified%20by%20KalshiEX%20LLC.), which is a step in the right direction. Even if the CFTC was actively regulating sketchy bets on Kalshi, I'm not sure they would be able to successfully mitigate even a small amount of the exploitation happening, given how hard it is to determine who has information on any event. It's much easier with insider trading on Wall Street, because you know who works for what company and you can monitor their trades. What I'm trying to say is it might start with changing the length of a speech, but as it becomes more accepted, important decisions will be made not because they are the right decisions, but because they were deemed unlikely in the prediction market and therefore will yield a huge gain.

(Something about more rich + powerful people having better access the insider information or the ability to influence the outcomes gives the wealthy an edge.)

// TODO: not sure if I should keep this or not.. is my intention to give my opinion or just state how things are?
Okay well, how do we solve this? I think prediction market events should be limited only to subjects that a regulatory agency can reasonably oversee. For example, US elections are already heavily regulated for fraud, so they are not as easy to manipulate for personal gain. It's similar to the proposal for removing prop bets in sports betting. The general theme is that allowing people to bet money on easily manipulatable events is a recipe for insider trading.